SQLite Table Lookup & Maintenance Module Specification

1. Purpose
A general-purpose UI module for:
  Viewing
  Sorting
  Adding
  Editing
records in any SQLite table.
The module must be reusable (callable from other programs) and also runnable standalone.

Target: Windows 11. Implementation: Python 3 with PySide6.

2. Inputs / Parameters
2.1 Programmatic (embedded)
The module accepts:
  database_path (optional)
  table_name (optional)
  record_id (optional; scroll/select in the main list after load)

When database_path and table_name are both provided:
  Determine the table’s record ID column (see Section 9.1)
  Load and display data ordered by the ID column (subject to user sort)
  Position the list at the passed record_id when possible

When parameters are omitted, last-used values may be restored from local storage (see 9.2).

2.2 Command line
Entry points:
  python -m table_maint  [options]
  python main.py         [options]   (project root; forwards to the same CLI)

Options:
  -d, --database       SQLite database file path
  -t, --table          Table name
  -r, --record, --id    Record ID for list positioning or edit context
  -w, --window         list | edit
       list  = main grid (default)
       edit  = record add/edit form; without -d/-t opens a small launcher shell

3. Main List View
3.1 Data Display
Display all columns for the table
One row per record
Default sort: by ID column (until the user changes header sort)

3.2 Sorting
Click column header → sort by that column (toggle asc/desc when same column)
Ctrl + click → add to multi-column sort (compound ordering)

3.3 Empty grid
If the database file is missing: show a short error in the status area; no rows.
If the table name is blank, invalid for the identifier rules, or not usable in that database:
  Show no rows (no modal error). The database path may still be remembered.

4. Edit / Add Functionality
4.1 Edit Window
Opened via Add/Edit or via -w edit with database and table.
Must be:
  Non-modal (separate top-level window; routine feedback avoids application-modal dialogs)
  Implemented in table_maint.edit_window
  Runnable standalone (python -m table_maint.edit_window or the launcher shell)

4.2 Edit Window – Top Panel
Same database/table controls as the main list view:
  Database Path — editable, file picker
  Table Name — editable
  History dropdown — recent database file paths (see 9.2)
Selecting a history entry sets the database path and triggers reload behavior.

Changing database path or table name:
  Reloads schema dynamically
  Refreshes fields for the current record context
  If the current record no longer exists → clear or reset the form

4.3 Layout
Fields displayed vertically
One input per column
Dynamically generated from table schema

4.4 Behavior
“Apply changes” commits updates; success closes the editor and refreshes the list when applicable.

4.5 Add from main list
From the main grid, “Add…” opens the record editor in insert mode.
  If one or more rows are selected: the form is pre-filled with the values from the
  topmost selected row (smallest visual row index among the current selection). The user
  may change any field, including key columns, before applying; this is a new-row insert,
  not an update of the template row.
  If no row is selected: the form starts empty for optional (NULLable) columns (NULL
  checked where applicable). Key columns and NOT NULL columns without defaults follow
  the same rules as in §5 (required before save where applicable).

4.6 ID Handling
If ID is changed:
  If no other row holds that ID → update (including primary key change where SQLite allows)
  If another row already holds that ID → show a non-blocking error message
Insert mode: reject if that ID already exists

5. Data Rules
5.1 Null Handling
For each column:
  If NULLABLE: UI may set NULL (checkbox where applicable)
  If NOT NULL and the column has no schema DEFAULT: require a value before save
  If NOT NULL and the column has a schema DEFAULT: an empty editor value omits that column
    from the generated SQL. On add (INSERT), SQLite applies the column DEFAULT. On update
    (UPDATE), the cell is not listed in SET, so the stored value is left unchanged.
    A non-empty value is saved as usual.
Applies to non-ID columns as enforced by schema; ID is always required (5.2).

5.2 ID Column
Resolved per Section 9.1. Treated as non-null and unique for application logic.

6. Database & Table Controls (Main List View)
6.1 Database Path
Editable text field; file picker (Browse).

6.2 Table Name
Editable field; initially from parameter or restored session.

6.3 History Dropdown
Shows recent database file paths (most recent first), independent of the current table name.
Selecting an entry sets the database path and reloads (table may remain as entered).

7. Invocation Modes
7.1 Embedded Mode
Host supplies parameters where needed; may use open_table_maint() or TableMaintMainWindow(...).
Host must run a Qt event loop.

7.2 Standalone Mode
Without CLI arguments: restore last database path from storage when available; optionally restore last table name.
First run or empty storage: fields may start blank; no grid data until a valid database (and table for rows) is available.

8. Module Requirements
Reusable from other Python programs; runnable as __main__ or via main.py.
Edit window lives in its own module and shares DatabaseTableControls with the main view.

9. Key Design Rules
9.1 Record key (“ID”) detection
  All PRIMARY KEY columns, in PK order from PRAGMA table_info (composite keys allowed).
  If no PK: the first column that appears in a single-column UNIQUE index, in table column order.
  Else: the first multi-column UNIQUE index (by SQLite index name order).
  If none of the above: error; the table cannot be maintained by this tool.
Used as record identifier, default sort on key columns, and for positioning / add / edit /
delete. For a composite key, the CLI accepts one -r/--record value per key column, in order.

9.2 History and session storage
Storage file (typical Windows location):
  %APPDATA%\table_maint\db_history.json

The file stores:
  A global most-recently-used list of database file paths (not keyed by table name)
  Last session: last database path and last table name (updated after a successful table load)

Table names entered in the UI are restricted to letters, digits, and underscores for safe SQL identifiers.

10. Key Design Constraints
Dynamic schema (no hardcoded columns)
Respect SQLite NULL / NOT NULL in the editor
Multi-column sorting on the main grid
Non-blocking UI: avoid modal message boxes for routine feedback; use non-modal messages or status text where appropriate
Consistent database context between main list view and edit window
